Bylaws
Contents [hide] 
1 Article I — NAME, MISSION, and PURPOSE
1.1 Section 1 — Name
1.2 Section 2 — Mission
1.3 Section 3 — General purpose
2 Article II — MEMBERSHIP
2.1 Section 1 — Eligibility for Membership
2.2 Section 2 — Membership dues
2.2.1 Section 2.1 — Standard Member Dues
2.2.2 Section 2.2 — Board Member Dues
2.2.3 Section 2.3 — Charter Member Dues
2.2.4 Section 2.4 — Starving Member Dues
2.3 Section 3 — Rights and Responsibilities of Members
2.3.1 Section 3.1 — Regular Members
2.3.2 Section 3.2 — Board Members
2.3.3 Section 3.3 — Charter Members
2.3.4 Section 3.4 — Starving Members
2.4 Section 4 — Resignation and termination
2.5 Section 5 — Friend and Family Sponsored Members
3 Article III — MEETINGS OF MEMBERS
3.1 Section 1 — Regular meetings
3.2 Section 2 — Annual meetings=
3.3 Section 3 — Special meetings
3.4 Section 4 — Voting
3.5 Section 5 — Quorum
4 ARTICLE IV — BOARD OF DIRECTORS
4.1 Section 1 — Board role, size and compensation:
4.2 Section 2 — Terms
4.3 Section 3 — Meetings and notice
4.4 Section 4 — Board election protocol
4.5 Section 5 — Quorum
4.6 Section 6 — Officers and duties
4.7 Section 7 — Vacancies
4.8 Section 8 — Resignation, termination, and absences:
4.9 Section 9 — Special meetings
4.10 Section 10 — Indemnification
5 Article V — COMMITTEES
5.1 Section 1 — Committee formation
6 Article VI — AMENDMENTS
6.1 Section 1 — Amendments:
7 Article VII — TERMS OF USE
7.1 Section 1 — Personal responsibility
8 Article VIII — DISSOLUTION
8.1 Section 1 — Dissolution
8.2 Section 2 — Asset Distribution
9 CERTIFICATION
Article I — NAME, MISSION, and PURPOSE

Section 1 — Name

The name of the organization shall be Hackerspace Charlotte, and may be abbreviated as HSC. It shall be a nonprofit organization incorporated under the laws of the State of North Carolina.
Section 2 — Mission

Hackerspace Charlotte is organized exclusively for charitable, scientific, and educational purposes. The mission of this organization is to foster a collaborative and educational environment wherein people can explore and create intersections between technology, science, art, and culture.
Provide work space, storage, and other resources for projects related to technology, science, art, and culture that will benefit the individual members' personal growth in their fields of interest.
Foster a creative, collaborative environment for experimentation and development in technology, science, and art.
Interact with the local public community that our space is situated in through talks, classes, workshops, collaborative projects, and other cultural and educational activities.
Encourage individual members to share their projects and research, exchange knowledge, and promote learning and mentoring in a safe, clean space.
Promote collaboration across disciplines for the benefit of cultural, charitable, and scientific causes.
Section 3 — General purpose

Hackerspace Charlotte is organized exclusively for charitable, educational, and scientific purposes within the meaning of Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, or the corresponding section of any future federal tax code.
Article II — MEMBERSHIP

Section 1 — Eligibility for Membership

Standard Members are defined as any individual who has signed the HSC liability statement, is in good standing, and that supports the mission statement in Article I, Section 2 of the bylaws. Individuals not 18 years of age must have their parent or guardian written approval to join.
Board Members are defined as Standard Members or Charter Members who have been elected to serve in a position on the Board of Directors.
Charter Members are defined as the group of individuals involved in the creation of the organization. More specifically Charter members are Standard members who paid dues and contributed donations prior to Hackerspace Charlotte renting or owning real estate. A Standard Member can become a Charter Member with a unanimous vote of all existing Charter Members. Initial Charter Member pledges and dues shall be collected for a period lasting one calendar month from the initial adoption of these bylaws.
Starving Members are defined as individuals who are actively engaged in participation with HSC, have had an application for Starving Member status approved by the board, and elects not to be a Standard Member.
Section 2 — Membership dues

Section 2.1 — Standard Member Dues
(a) The amount, payment period, due date and acceptable methods for collection of dues shall be reviewed each year at the annual meeting. The board may, at its own discretion by majority vote, accept pledges that are not monetary, such as maintaining property, advertising the organization, etc.
Section 2.2 — Board Member Dues
(a) The amount, payment period, due date and acceptable methods for collection of dues shall be reviewed each year at the annual meeting. The board may accept pledges, at its own discretion by majority vote, that are not monetary, such as maintaining property, advertising the organization, etc.
Section 2.3 — Charter Member Dues
(a) Charter Member dues shall be set by the Charter Members at the beginning of each fiscal year, and may be changed by a majority vote of all Charter Members during the year at a Specially called meeting of the Charter Members. Continued Charter Membership is contingent upon maintaining good standing with HSC in regards to dues.
Section 2.4 — Starving Member Dues
(a) The minimum amount, payment period, due date and acceptable methods for collection of dues shall be reviewed each year at the annual meeting. The board may, at its own discretion by majority vote, accept pledges that are not monetary, such as maintaining property, advertising the organization, etc.
Section 3 — Rights and Responsibilities of Members

Section 3.1 — Regular Members
(a) Members may vote in organization elections. (b) Members may serve on the board of the organization. (c) Members shall vouch for guests, taking responsibility for the property of the organization upon themselves. (d) Members may request unsupervised access to the organization's facilities on a case-by-case basis. (e) Members shall follow all rules set by the board. (f) Members shall recognize and not allow the continuation of unsafe behavior by other members or guests of the organization's facilities while the member is present.
Section 3.2 — Board Members
(a) Board Members may vote in organization elections. (b) Board Members shall serve a term of one year. (c) Board Members shall be allowed to serve an unlimited amount of terms. (d) Board Members shall vouch for guests, taking responsibility for the property of the organization upon themselves. (e) Board Members shall state an intended pledge amount to help offset the costs of the organization. (f) Board Members shall follow all rules set by the board. (g) Board Members shall have unattended, non-exclusive access to the property of the organization. (h) Board Members shall be able to motion for a vote by the membership on issues, to be conducted at a meeting previously scheduled.
Section 3.3 — Charter Members
(a) Charter Members shall have unattended, non-exclusive access to the property of the organization. (b) Charter Members may Reset the Board with a 3/4 vote in favor by the Charter Members. All previous Board members may re-run for the open Board positions after a Board Reset. Board members must be voted in by majority after a Board Reset, candidates may not be elected by default, unless the candidate is the only nominee for a Board position. (c) Charter Members may serve as a Board member-at-large in addition to the already existing Board Members only while present at a Board Meeting or by proxy. (d) Charter Members shall vouch for guests, taking responsibility for the property of the organization upon themselves.
Section 3.4 — Starving Members
(a) Starving Members shall not vote in elections. (b) Starving Members shall not serve on the board. (c) Starving Members shall vouch for guests, taking responsibility for the property of the organization upon themselves. (d) Starving Members shall state an intended pledge amount to help offset the costs of the organization. (e) Starving Members may be required to complete a specified amount of service hours set by the board.
Section 4 — Resignation and termination

(a) Any member may resign by filing a written resignation with the secretary. (b) A non Charter Member can have their membership terminated by a majority vote of the membership. (c) Upon resignation or termination all property loaned to the terminated/resigned member by Hackerspace Charlotte must be returned. Similarly, all property the resigning member has loaned to the collective space will be returned to the resigning member or made available for the individual to pick up. The terminated/resigned shall have 30 days from the date written on a signed resignation or notice of termination to pick up any property. If the property is not collected it is considered abandoned and becomes property of Hackerspace Charlotte. (d) Any member who is not in good standing with regards to outstanding dues shall be considered to have resigned membership at the beginning of the third calendar month following the first missed due payment.
Section 5 — Friend and Family Sponsored Members

Members in good standing may sponsor one person to join the organization, with the privileges of that member, at a 50% discount from that member's dues. This shall be known as the Friend Or Family plan. Sponsored members under the Friend or Family plan may not sponsor additional persons.
Article III — MEETINGS OF MEMBERS

Section 1 — Regular meetings

(a) Regular meetings of the members shall be held at minimum once quarterly, at a time and place designated by the President or Vice-President.
Section 2 — Annual meetings=

(a) An annual meeting of the members shall take place for the purposes of electing a new board, creating or terminating additional board positions, allowing board members to vote on any outstanding issues, or any other reason requiring a vote of the members.
Section 3 — Special meetings

(a) Special meetings may be called by the President, Vice-President, or a simple majority of the board. A petition signed by no less than half of voting members, plus one vote, may also call a special meeting. (b) New Board positions may be created during special meetings only when forming a committee.
Section 4 — Voting

(a) Board members shall motion to vote and a second motion is required for all issues. (b) Qualified members must be present to vote or they must submit a vote to the secretary, by proxy, either on paper or via e-mail.
Section 5 — Quorum

(a) At a duly called meeting, at least 25% (one quarter) of the entire voting membership shall constitute a quorum.
ARTICLE IV — BOARD OF DIRECTORS

Section 1 — Board role, size and compensation:

(a) The board is responsible for overall policy and direction of the association, and delegates responsibility of day-to-day operations to volunteers and committees. (b) There shall be up to Ten (10) officers but no fewer than Four (4) officers collectively referred to as 'The board'. There shall always be a President also referred to as the Chair, a Vice-President, a Treasurer, and a Secretary. (c) No officer shall be compensated for their service as an officer, though the corporation may provide insurance and indemnity for officers as allowed by law.
Section 2 — Terms

(a) All board members shall serve one year terms.
Section 3 — Meetings and notice

(a) The board shall meet at least quarterly, at an agreed upon time and place. An official board meeting requires that each board member receive written notice (such as email) at least 14 days in advance. Meetings may be held via electronic means, such as a chat room or a conference call, provided all board members are able to communicate clearly.
Section 4 — Board election protocol

(a) Any member can nominate a candidate to the slate of nominees. (b) Nominations should be submitted to the Secretary. (c) Elections will be held at the Annual Meeting except in the event of a vacancy or during a special meeting to form a new committee. (d) At least Four (4) board members must be elected to fill the positions of Chair, Vice-Chair, Treasurer, and Secretary. (e) The Board shall have up to Ten (10) elected members, but no fewer than Four (4). (f) To be elected, nominees must receive a majority vote by the members present at the annual meeting or special meeting or by proxy. If there is only one nominee for a board position, that person is considered to have run unopposed and is considered elected to the board as of the date the board election is held. (g) Votes will be accepted on paper, ballot style to be taken up and counted by the secretary. (h) Additional board positions may be created or terminated at the annual meeting or special meeting by a majority vote of the members in attendance or by proxy. (i) Eligible Members shall be elected for any additional board positions.
Section 5 — Quorum

(a) Three quarters (3/4) of board members constitutes a quorum for business transactions to take place and motions to pass.
Section 6 — Officers and duties

(a) There shall be no less than four officers of the board, consisting of a Chair, Vice-Chair, Treasurer, and Secretary. Additional board positions are optional and their duties shall be amended to the bylaws in writing. (b) The Chair shall convene regularly scheduled board meetings, shall preside or arrange for other members of the Executive Committee to preside at each meeting. If the chair cannot make the meeting, the Chair shall arrange for another board member to preside at the meeting. The chair may also have other duties as required by HSC. (c) The Vice-Chair shall also be empowered to convene regularly scheduled board meetings, shall preside or arrange for other members of the Executive Committee to preside at each meeting. If the chair or vice chair cannot make the meeting, the Vice Chair may arrange for another board member to preside at the meeting. The Vice chair may also have other duties as required by HSC. (d) The Secretary shall be responsible for keeping records of board actions, including overseeing the taking of minutes at all board meetings, sending out meeting announcements, distributing copies of minutes and the agenda to each board member, and assuring that corporate records are maintained. The secretary shall also maintain the social media functions of HSC, if any, as necessary. (e) The Treasurer shall make a report on finances at each board meeting. The treasurer shall chair the finance committee, assist in the preparation of the budget, help develop fundraising plans, and make financial information available to board members and the public. (f) The Safety Coordinator shall be responsible for ensuring that safety information is freely available to all persons using the Hackerspace for all relevant subjects,to include, but not limited to Operators manuals, safety tip sheets, warning signs and notices, and MSDS's. The Coordinator will ensure that safety instruction is available for anyone in the Hackerspace upon request. The Coordinator will be the contact for notification of defective or unsafe equipment and situations and will co-ordinate the removal from service and repair/return to service of such situations. This is an optional Board position. (g) The Public Affairs Contact shall serve as a contact point for the Hackerspace Charlotte with regards to its dealings with the public and other organizations. The Contact shall be in charge of the upkeep of the official calendar of events for the Hackerspace Charlotte. Any member may initiate or conduct conversations with any person or group on behalf of the Hackerspace, but it is expected that the Public Affairs Contact be kept advised of such actions in order to avoid confusion and having the organization committed beyond its' resources. A majority decision of the Board is required to commit Hackerspace funds for any outside activity. This is an optional Board position. (h) The Location Scouting Coordinator shall act as the leader and point of contact for the Location Scouting Committee. The Coordinator shall delegate responsibility for contacting property owners, landlords, and agents to prescreen potential locations on behalf of Hackerspace Charlotte, Inc. If a property is fit for use by Hackerspace Charlotte, Inc. the Coordinator is responsible to scheduling a showing of the place to all Hackerspace Charlotte members who wish to see the location. Only after the showing of the property to the members will a vote take place with regards to leasing or purchasing the location. The Coordinator shall submit a proposal to the secretary for review by the Board of Directors prior to voting. The Coordinator shall present a summary of findings at the monthly Board Meetings. (i) The Events Coordinator shall act as the leader and point of contact for the Events Committee. The Coordinator shall delegate responsibility for finding local events which Hackerspace Charlotte may want to attend and also for organizing Hackerspace Charlotte events such as workshops and fundraisers. The Coordinator shall present a summary of findings at the monthly Board Meetings.
Section 7 — Vacancies

(a) When a vacancy on the board exists mid-term, the secretary must receive nominations for new board members from present board members one week in advance of a board meeting. These nominations shall be sent out to board members with the regular board meeting announcement to be voted upon at the next board meeting. These vacancies will be filled only to the end of the particular board member's term.
Section 8 — Resignation, termination, and absences:

(a) Resignation from the board must be in writing and received by the Secretary. A board member may be terminated from the board due to excess absences defined as more than two unexcused absences from board meetings in a year. A board member may be removed for other reasons by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the remaining directors. (b) Resignation as a Charter Member must be in writing and received by the Secretary. A Charter Member may be removed for other reasons by a unanimous vote of the remaining Charter Members.
Section 9 — Special meetings

(a) Special meetings of the board shall be called upon the request of the chair or one-third (1/3) of the board. (b) Notices of special meetings shall be sent out by the secretary to each board member at least two weeks in advance except when all Board Members are present at the monthly Board Meeting and the chair or one-third (1/3) of the board calls for a special meeting. With regard to the preceding exception a vote of one-third (1/3) of the board may reject the proposal for a special meeting until 2 weeks notice has been given.
Section 10 — Indemnification

Every person who is or shall have been a director or officer of the Corporation and his and her personal representatives shall be indemnified by the Corporation against all costs and expenses reasonably incurred by or imposed upon him or her in connection with or resulting from any action, suit, or proceeding to which he or she shall be made a party by reason of his or her being or having been a director or officer of the Corporation or of any subsidiary or affiliate thereof, except in relation to such matters as to which he or she shall be finally be adjudicated in such action, suit, or proceeding, to have acted in bad faith and to have been liable by reason of willful misconduct in the performance of his or her duty as such director or officer. "Costs and expenses" shall include, but without limiting the generality thereof, attorney's fees, damages, and reasonable amounts paid in settlement.
Article V — COMMITTEES

Section 1 — Committee formation

(a) The board may create committees as needed, such as fundraising, facilities, public relations, data collection, etc. (b) The board chair appoints all committee chairs. Section 2 — Finance Committee (a) The treasurer is the chair of the Finance Committee, which may include three other board members. (b) The Finance Committee is responsible for developing and reviewing fiscal procedures, fundraising plans, and the annual budget with Member volunteers and other Board Members. (c) The board must approve the budget and any changes to the budget. All expenditures must be within budget. (d) The fiscal year shall be the calendar year. (e) Monthly and Annual reports are required to be submitted to the board showing income, expenditures, and pending income. The financial records of the organization are public information and shall be made available to the membership, board members, and any government, law officer, or other national, state or local official by request.
Article VI — AMENDMENTS

Section 1 — Amendments:

(a) Proposed amendments must be submitted to the Secretary to be sent out with regular board announcements. (b) Approved amendments must be appended in writing to Appendix A of these bylaws and should never be removed or altered after approval. (c) If changes are required to the amendment it must be in the form of a new amendment. (d) These bylaws may be amended when necessary by three-quarters majority of the board of directors. (e) Article I of the bylaws may only be amended with a unanimous vote in favor by the board of directors. (f) A reasonable effort must be made to contact the Charter Members immediately following a proposed and seconded movement to amend these bylaws.
Article VII — TERMS OF USE

Section 1 — Personal responsibility

(a) All persons using the facilities of the Hackerspace Charlotte agree, as a condition of such use, to release from liability and hold harmless the Hackerspace Charlotte from any claim for any damages whether direct or indirect, including those resulting from any negligence by any member or guest of the Hackerspace Charlotte. (b) It is the sole responsibility and duty of any person using any equipment provided by the Hackerspace Charlotte, (whether such equipment is the property of the Hackerspace or loaned to it by any person or other entity), to insure that that person understands and follows all operating and usage instructions, including especially but not limited to, safety precautions and best practices, and to act in such a way as to prevent damage to themselves, other people, equipment and/or the surrounding environment. Many items of equipment are dangerous and/or expensive and the user assumes all liability, including liability for damage to themselves or the equipment as a condition of using any equipment at the Hackerspace Charlotte. (c) Notwithstanding the above all persons using the Hackerspace Charlotte agree as a condition of such use to comply with any reasonable requests, including requests to desist use of any equipment or leave any area, made by any Member of the Hackerspace Charlotte. Any person is entitled to know why a Member makes such a request and may appeal such a request to a Charter or Board Member or request assistance or clarification from any available Member in the event of a disagreement. Note that the presence or absence of any request or statement from any Member of the Hackerspace in no way constitutes an endorsement by the Hackerspace of any course of action. All statements by Members of the Hackerspace Charlotte are their own and create no corporate liability on the part of the Hackerspace. (d) The Hackerspace Charlotte reserves the right to eject or refuse entrance or service to any person for any reason at any time. Such right may be exercised by a majority decision of the Hackerspace Members present at anytime, however members are cautioned that such extreme measures should only be used in cases of pressing danger or immediate threat. In normal circumstances a request to ban a person from the Hackerspace should be presented to the Board and handled in an expeditious, fair and open manner. (e) Hackerspace Charlotte strongly encourages Members, Guests, and all persons visiting HSC at any time and for any purpose to have health insurance. Section 2 — Donation and loan of property (a) Members or other persons may loan or donate equipment or tools to the Hackerspace Charlotte with the understanding that Hackerspace Charlotte is not responsible for the upkeep or protection of the equipment and is not liable for any harm, damage, or injury directly or indirectly resulting from the use of said equipment or tools. The hackerspace will make reasonable attempts to provide upkeep and protection for such equipment, as well as a safe environment and adequate training for the use of such equipment and tools, but is unable to and makes no representation to, provide any particular level of service. (b) Tools or equipment donated to the Hackerspace become the sole property of Hackerspace Charlotte and are subject to use and disposal by Hackerspace Charlotte with consent of The Board. Donations to Hackerspace Charlotte shall be recorded in writing and such records shall be maintained by the treasurer as required by North Carolina law. (c) Tools and equipment loaned to Hackerspace Charlotte shall be available for use by any person or group at Hackerspace Charlotte for any legitimate purpose during the operating hours of Hackerspace Charlotte, subject only to a requirement that a user demonstrate an understanding of the correct and safe use of the tool or equipment in question. (d) Tools and equipment purchased by or donated to Hackerspace Charlotte should be clearly marked as "Property of: Hackerspace Charlotte" using the most permanent method possible. (ie. engraving, branding, permanent marker, label coated with liquid acrylic). Records which include a photo, manufacturer name, model number, and serial number should be kept for the duration of the items existence in Hackerspace Charlotte.
Article VIII — DISSOLUTION

Section 1 — Dissolution

(a) The organization may not dissolve less than 30 calendar days from the time a proposal to dissolve passes. A reasonable effort must be made to contact the Charter Members immediately following a proposed and seconded dissolution movement.
Section 2 — Asset Distribution

(a) In the event that a movement to dissolve the organization passes, assets may be liquidated to pay off any debt the organization may have accrued. Members who have loaned items to Hackerspace Charlotte will be notified via certified U.S. Mail at the mailing address provided to HSC to pick up these materials. If members cannot be contacted or do not respond within 14 calendar days of such notice, items loaned to Hackerspace Charlotte will be treated as an asset of Hackerspace Charlotte. Any remaining assets of the organization must be donated to a qualified charitable, educational, or scientific endeavor as determined by the board.
CERTIFICATION

These bylaws were approved at a meeting of the board of directors by a three-quarters majority vote on October 12, 2010.